>>Dr. Michio Kaku, who is an
internationally-recognized
authority in
theoretical physics.
He holds the Henry
Semat Professorship
in Theoretical Physics
at the City College
and the Graduate Center of the
City University of New York.
His goal is to help
complete Einstein's dream
of a theory of
everything, which will
unify all the fundamental
forces in the universe.
Professor Kaku has
written nine books.
The last two, "Hyperspace"
and "Visions,"
becoming international
best sellers.
And just a little
sidelight-- New York Magazine
recently had a
contest, and Dr. Kaku
was selected as one of the 100
smartest people in New York.
Let's give a warm welcome
to Dr. Michio Kaku.
>>It is true that New
York Magazine selected me
as one of the 100 smartest
people in New York City.
However, in all fairness,
I should point out
that Madonna also
made that same list.
Very smart woman.
Well, today, I'll be
talking about some
of the revolutionary
breakthroughs taking place
in the world of
physics and science.
And Stephen Hawking
has said that we
are on the verge of, quote,
"reading the mind of God."
However, we have to be humble.
There's one thing I've
learned being a physicist,
and that is we have
to be humble when
we approach the great
mysteries of the universe.
As Professor Haldane once
said, "The universe is not
only queerer than we
suppose, it is queerer
than we can suppose."
And today, I will be
talking about the future.
What does the future
hold as we physicists
close in on a comprehensive
theory of hyperspace?
Well, it's very dangerous
talking about the future.
Yogi Berra-- let me now
quote from that great sage
of the baseball diamond.
Yogi Berra once said, quote,
"Prediction is very hard to do,
especially if it's
about the future."
To which Abraham Lincoln
might have said, quote,
"Gentlemen, sometimes,
it is better
to keep your mouth shut,
even if your friends think
of you as a fool,
rather than to open it
up and remove all doubts."
Well, today, I will be opening
the mouths of scientists,
my colleagues, Steven
Hawking, and others who are,
we think, closing in on
a theory of the universe.
However, I should also point
out that we physicists sometimes
get too cocky, and
we make predictions
that don't turn out.
We physicists
invented the internet.
In fact, it was a
theoretician in Switzerland
who created the worldwide web.
The internet was our
baby, our creation.
And we made a prediction
for the internet.
We predicted that it would
be a forum for high culture
and high intellectual learning.
Well, today, we know that 10%
of the internet is pornography.
And that's because
mainly teenage boys
log on to the internet.
Just wait till the grandmas and
grandpas log onto the internet.
Then 50% of the internet
will be pornography.
Yes, we physicists
in the past have been
too arrogant and too cocky.
And sometimes, we know
too much for our own good.
Let me tell you a story.
Because next week,
I'm speaking in Paris
where, of course, 200 years ago,
they had a great revolution.
Well, let me tell you
a story about that.
200 years ago, there
were three gentleman
about to lose their
head to the guillotine
because they were members
of the aristocracy.
There was a priest, a lawyer,
and a theoretical physicist,
just like me, about to lose
our head to the chopping block.
Well, they put the priest's
head on the chopping block.
And they asked him, do
you have any last words
before we cut your
aristocratic head off?
And he said yes.
He said, God, from above, from
heaven, he shall set me free.
Well, we'll see about
that, said the executioner.
So they put the priest's
head on the chopping block.
And they raised the
guillotine blade.
And the blade came down-- swish.
And it stopped right before
it hit the neck of the priest.
Well, the crowd gasped.
They'd never seen
anything like this before.
This was a miracle, they said.
Let him go.
Now let's see about that lawyer.
Well, they put the lawyer's
head on the chopping block.
And they asked him, do
you have any last words
before we cut your head off?
Let's see you talk your way
out of this one, Mr. Lawyer.
Well, he said, maybe the
spirit of justice in the sky,
maybe she shall set
me free, I hope.
Well, the blade came up.
And the blade came down-- swish.
And it stopped right before
it hit the neck of the lawyer.
Well, this time,
there was dancing
in the streets of Paris.
People were saying,
God has spoken.
Let the priest go.
Let the lawyer go.
And now let's see about
that theoretical physicist.
Well, they put the physicist's
head on the chopping block.
And they asked him, do
you have any last words
before we cut your
scientific head off?
And the physicists said, yeah.
Yeah, I got some last words.
And he said, you know, I
don't know too much about God,
and I know even
less about the law.
But I do know one
thing-- if you look up,
you'll see that the rope
has caught on the pulley.
And then he said, if
you remove the rope,
the blade should
come down real good.
Big mistake.
Well, the rope came down.
The pulley came down.
The blade came down.
The physicist's head came down.
And it just goes to show you
that sometimes, we physicists
get too cocky for our own good.
Sometimes, as Lincoln said,
we should keep our mouth shut.
Well, let me tell you how
I got involved in science.
When I was a kid,
I was fascinated
by the work of Einstein.
I remember when I
was a child of eight,
it was in all the papers.
My elementary school
teacher announced that day
that a great scientist
had just died.
Very few people
understood what he said,
but he changed everything.
The bomb, the universe.
But you see, that night,
on the newspapers,
they flashed a
picture of his desk.
Because on that desk was
the unfinished manuscript
of his greatest unfinished work.
It was to be the Unified
Field Theory, the theory
of everything, the theory
that would unite the Big
Bang with quasars,
stars, galaxies,
all the ferment we
see in the heavens,
with physics on the planet
Earth, people, maybe even love.
But he died.
And I said to
myself, as a kid, I
want to know what was in
that unfinished manuscript.
To me, this was greater
than any detective story,
greater than any murder mystery.
I wanted to complete
what was in that book.
And when I was in
high school, I was
so enamored of this new physics
that I went to my mom one day.
And I said, mom, can
I have permission
to build a 2.3 million
electron volt atom
smasher in the garage?
And my mom scratched her
head and said, sure, why not?
And don't forget to take out
the garbage while you're at it.
Well, I went to Westinghouse.
I got 400 pounds of transformer
steel, 22 miles of copper wire.
And I built a 2.3 million
electron volt 6 kilowatt
betatron in the garage.
The moment had finally
come to turn it on.
I closed my eyes, covered
my ears, and plugged it in.
There was this huge
crackling as I blew out
every single transformer,
every single fuse,
every single circuit
breaker in the house.
And the whole house was
plunged in darkness.
My poor mom.
My mom would say to
herself, why couldn't I
have a son who plays baseball?
Maybe if I buy him a basketball.
And for God's sake, why can't
he find a nice Japanese girl?
What's wrong with him?
Well, the atom smasher
got me a full scholarship,
and it won me the attention of
a scientist, an atomic scientist
who made my career.
He took me under his wing.
And he arranged for me to
get a four-year scholarship
to Harvard.
I visit the family
twice a year--
in summertime and in Christmas.
He lived on Hawthorne
Terrace in Berkeley.
And I went an awful lot to him.
His name was Edward Teller, the
father of the hydrogen bomb.
But that's another story.
Let me tell you now about
what was in that manuscript.
As we know, there
are four forces
which govern the
universe, maybe a fifth.
Nobel laureate Richard
Feynman held out
for the possibility
of a fifth force.
But anyway, so far, we have
found four fundamental forces
that rule our visible universe.
The first is gravity.
Gravity is the force which
keeps us on the chair.
Otherwise, we'll be flung into
outer space with satellites.
The second force is the
electromagnetic force.
The force that lights up our
cities and changed the world.
I'm reminded of
a story they tell
of Michael Faraday,
a man who's so
famous he's on British money.
His face is actually
printed on British money.
Michael Faraday, 150 years ago,
was building the generators,
the machines, the motors, that
would electrify the world.
But 150 years ago in Piccadilly,
London, none of them worked.
The second great force
could not be harnessed.
One day, William Gladstone,
prime minister of England,
came by.
And Mr. Gladstone kicked
some of these machines.
And he said, Mr. Faraday,
your fame is widespread.
But of what use will your
machines have for the empire?
Well, Mr. Faraday
didn't know what to say.
Nothing worked.
And then he collected
his thoughts
and said, Mr. Prime
Minister, I know
not of what use
electricity and my machines
will have for the empire.
But I do know one thing--
one day, you will tax them.
And that has come to be.
50% of the world's taxes
come from electricity.
We take it for granted.
We never even see electricity.
In fact, if you ever
see electricity,
you're in big trouble.
We don't even use the word
"electricity" anymore,
unless, of course,
you're from California.
But electricity, as
we know, is governed
by Maxwell's equations.
It is an astonishing equation.
It is half an inch long.
And it is required to get a PhD.
In any physics
laboratory in the world.
Maxwell's equations say, the
four-dimensional divergence
of an antisymmetric second
rank tensor equals zero.
And that is the
equation for light.
And, in fact, in Berkeley,
where I got my PhD,
you can get a t-shirt which
says, "In the beginning,
God said, the
four-dimensional divergence
of an antisymmetric second
rank tensor equals zero.
And there was light.
And it was good.
And on the seventh
day, he rested."
Well, now we have the nuclear
force, the bad boy of physics.
We have something
called reductionism.
We would smash
atoms apart, and we
would see neutrons and protons.
And then it got really hairy.
In the 1950s, we
started to find mesons.
We started to find
kappa particles,
and tau leptons, and
muons, and neutrinos.
Hundreds, hundreds of particles
when we smashed the atom apart.
Could God be malicious?
Showing that at the
fundamental reductionist level,
there are thousands
of subatomic particles
being discovered every day.
In fact, Robert Oppenheimer, the
man who built the atomic bomb,
was so frustrated by all
these subatomic particles
literally pouring out of our
machines or atom smashers
that he once said, quote,
"The Nobel Prize in physics
should go to the physicist
who does not discover
a new particle that year."
Well, reductionism failed.
We had the quark model.
But we have gluons, and
leptons, and neutrinos,
and three generations of quarks.
When I was a graduate
student, I had
to memorize the names of
all these goddamn particles.
Hundreds of them.
Just like 100 years
ago, to get a PhD,
you had to memorize
all the crystals.
Well, we don't do that anymore.
We know that behind crystals,
we have a fundamental theory
of a quantum.
Now we have these particles.
And then people began to
try for a unified theory.
A unified theory which
would unite these goddamn
particles with gravity, with
the electromagnetic force,
which would allow us to
understand stars and galaxies.
It was called the
Unified Field Theory.
Many people tried.
They all failed.
Einstein tried.
Heisenberg tried.
One day, Niels Bohr, founder
of the atomic theory,
was listening to a talk about
the Unified Field Theory.
He was at the back of the room.
And they were getting
all frustrated.
Everyone was
shaking their heads.
Finally, Niels Bohr
raised his hand and said,
Mr. Pauli, we in
the back are all
agreed that your
theory is crazy.
But what divides us
is whether or not
your theory is crazy enough.
That's the key.
We tried all the
simple theories.
A theory of everything would
have to be crazy enough.
It would have to be bizarre.
It would have to be fantastic.
It would have to be incredible.
It would have to be queerer
than we can suppose.
Reductionism hit a dead end.
With the quark model, we
were drowning in quarks.
How many quarks are there today?
36.
We were drowning in these
subatomic particles.
Well now, we have a new theory.
And this theory has shaken the
foundations of modern science.
Several best sellers have now
been propelled onto the best
seller list, my book included.
It's something
called string theory.
And we now believe that these
strings, like violin strings,
can have music.
And when these strings vibrate--
they vibrate, yes-- perhaps,
they are the condensation
of energy itself.
They create notes.
Now when you hear
a violin string,
you don't say A is fundamental.
You don't say B-flat
is better than C-sharp.
You don't say F
is better than G.
They're just notes on a string.
And how many notes are there?
Well, there's middle C, low C,
high C. How many Cs are there?
Infinite number.
I mean, Mariah Carey
could hit eight octaves.
How many octaves are
there on a violin string?
Eight?
Infinite number.
And how many melodies can
you play out on a string?
Infinite number.
Well, now we have
a very simple way
of describing all the
particles that I had
to memorize as a PhD student.
Quarks, leptons, neutrinos,
tau mesons, kappa leptons,
cascade particles,
thousands of particles
can now be summarized by
one word-- the string.
Notes on a string.
Music, just like the
Pythagoreans, the Greeks,
thought 2,000 years ago.
Well, you might be saying to
yourself, Mr. Smarty Pants,
if your theory can
explain quarks,
and mesons, and
electrons, and protons,
and neutrons, then
why didn't you
get the Nobel Prize in physics?
Well, there's a problem.
A big problem.
This theory is the only
theory known to science
which selects out its
own dimensionality.
It can only exist in 10, perhaps
11-dimensional hyperspace.
If this theory is correct,
it will be the greatest
achievement of the human
mind in the last 2,000 years,
since the Greeks
asked the question,
what is the world made out of?
And we now have a paradigm
for the mind of God.
The mind of God is music
resonating in hyperspace.
Music, melodies,
symphonies, harmonies,
being played out in
worlds that are invisible,
beyond human comprehension.
What is matter?
Matter that we see around us?
What is chemistry?
What is the atom?
It's nothing but
melodies, melodies
played out on the string.
What is the universe?
The universe is a
symphony of strings.
What are the laws of physics?
Harmonies.
Harmonies on a string.
Well, when the string
theory came out,
and when it was
realized that it only
existed in 10-dimensional
hyperspace,
the model collapsed.
Scientists could
not get themselves
to believe that our universe
existed beyond visible sight.
That there were unseen
universes, unseen worlds.
The model flopped.
Until about 10 years
ago, where it's since
become the dominant theory
in theoretical physics.
You can go anywhere
on the Earth,
go to any physics institution,
and they're desperately
trying to learn this theory.
This theory has overturned
every single goddamn conception
of our physical world.
Harvard, which once boasted
that it would never ever hire
a superstring physicist.
After all, why is it that
our generation of physicists
never cracked Harvard?
Simple answer.
They said never would
they tenure a superstring
physicist at Harvard.
Surprise-- they recently
hired three of them.
Princeton, Caltech,
they're all scrambling
to hire superstring theorists.
Now let me tell you a
story about hyperspace.
When I was a child growing up
in San Francisco in a suburb,
I used to visit the
Japanese Tea Garden.
In the Japanese
Tea Garden, there's
a pond with carp swimming.
And these fish swim
in two dimensions.
They can swim forward,
backward, left, right.
But it's a shallow pond.
There have lily pads.
Plus, their eyes
face to the side.
If you were to talk
to a scientist carp
and talk about the third
dimension, an unseen
universe called "up," the
fish would say, bah, humbug.
There is no up.
There is only the pond.
What is visible is all that is.
What is visible is
all that can exist.
There is no up.
And as a child, I asked
myself, what would it
be like to live in a
two dimensional pond?
And then one day,
I reached down,
and I thought of
grabbing one of the fish,
lifting the scientist
fish into hyperspace,
into the third dimension, where
the fish would see an unseen
world.
People moving without fins.
People breathing without water.
An alien physics, a whole world
in the direction called "up."
And what would the
people of the pond say?
The other fish would say, my god
the scientist just disappeared.
Vanished.
How could that be?
And then if I put the
fish back into the pond
where it would swim away,
they would say, the fish,
our scientist friend
has suddenly reappeared.
This is magic-- the ability to
vanish, to walk through walls,
to disappear.
And I said to myself,
I could almost
reach down and look on
the inside of these fish.
If these people lived in flat
land, on a sheet of paper,
like cookie men on
a sheet of paper,
I could reach inside
and perform surgery
without cutting their skin.
I could reach into a safe
and pull out the gold
without ever breaking it open.
I could take people in
jail, lift them out of jail,
and pluck them someplace else.
Well, 100 years ago,
mathematicians, scientists,
philosophers, were
just beginning
to understand the
fourth dimension.
And they asked themselves
a simple question--
who has this power?
The power to disappear,
reappear, walk through walls,
reach into any safe
and pull out the gold
without breaking the
safe, perform surgery
without ever cutting
the skin, the ability
to see all at once, to scan
a universe of its treasures?
Who has this power?
Well, ghosts.
And then began a 50-year
romance between hyperdimensional
physics and ghosts.
Religious people got
into the picture.
Ever since Galileo, the
Catholic Church had a problem.
The Catholic Church says
heaven is up there someplace.
But Galileo had the telescope.
He was passing out telescopes
everywhere he went.
For the rich, it was
going to a party on top
of a building in
Venice and watching
the sky with this telescope
that Galileo was passing out.
In those days, they
didn't pass out cocaine.
They passed out telescopes
at these parties.
Well, there was a problem.
Where was heaven?
No one could see heaven.
Well, around 1900, people
said that maybe God, heaven,
lives in the fourth dimension.
And then in 1900, there was
an obscure Spanish painter
who tried to paint
the fourth dimension.
And he said to himself, what
is the essence of medieval art?
Medieval art is
two-dimensional and flat.
Have you ever gone to a
museum and seen medieval art?
People look like this.
Right?
And do you say to yourself,
gee, couldn't they draw?
Why couldn't they
draw correctly?
Why is everyone flat-looking?
And the answer is medieval
art is two-dimensional
because God is everywhere.
Everywhere, every point, is no
special than any other point,
and therefore, the world must
be flat according to God.
And then in 1500 or so, all
of a sudden, we had Leonardo.
We had Donatello.
We had Michelangelo.
You know, what kids call
"The Ninja Turtles."
We had them blasting
into the third dimension.
All of a sudden, we had
prospective, the vanishing
point of the eye, the horizon.
All of a sudden, we
had "The Last Supper."
The point of view of men and
women, not the point of view
of God.
The third dimension.
And then in 1900, we had
this obscure Spanish painter,
penniless, who said to
himself, if medieval art
is two-dimensional,
if Renaissance art
is three-dimensional,
then I shall introduce
the fourth dimension in art.
Can anyone tell me?
Who was this obscure, penniless,
Spanish painter in Paris?
It was Picasso.
What is Cubism?
Surrealism.
Salvador Dali used to stay
at a friend of mine's house
in Brown University,
professor of mathematics,
Thomas Banchoff, an authority
in the fourth dimension.
And Dali used to
pump all information
he could from Thomas
Banchoff, asking him
about the fourth dimension.
You see, if you're
looking down on the pond,
if you're looking
down on a cookie man,
you see everywhere-- eyes,
nose, back, front, side.
You see the totality
of a cookie man
from the vantage point
of the third dimension.
So why did Picasso paint women
whose eyes are to the front
and nose is to the side?
Because if you are a hyperbeing
looking down from hyperspace,
you will see the nose, the
eyes, the back of the head
simultaneously.
And that's what Picasso
was trying to do,
representing cubism in art.
I was once in London, watching
some PhD students in art
analyze some of the
works of Picasso.
And I overheard
them saying, gee,
what was Picasso trying to do?
And I said to myself, gee,
I guess the only people
who don't know that
Picasso was trying
to represent the fourth
dimension, the only people who
don't know that are
PhD majors in art.
What is "Persistence of
Time" by Salvador Dali?
Dali, when he painted
these melted clocks,
he was trying to represent
time as the fourth dimension.
What about Marcel Duchamp,
"Nude Descending a Staircase"?
Why did we have a nude
descending a staircase?
To represent a time-lapse
motion of time.
Time as the fourth dimension.
So now we have the idea that
perhaps in hyperspace, there's
enough room to unite gravity,
the electromagnetic force,
and the nuclear force into
an equation perhaps only one
inch long.
And now let me ask
you another question,
a question about the universe
and where it came from.
Any theory this powerful
would say something
about the beginning of
time, about creation itself.
Well, we have the
Big Bang theory.
And the Big Bang
theory seems to agree
with a Judeo-Christian
theory of Genesis--
an instant of time when God
said, let there be light.
However, there's also Buddhism.
And in Buddhism, there is
nirvana, the nothingness,
the timelessness, no
beginning, no end.
Just nirvana.
How is it possible that we can
unite two divergent pictures,
the theory of Genesis,
an instant of creation,
with the theory of timelessness?
Well, we physicists now have
a new theory of creation.
It is called the multiverse.
We now believe that in the
beginning, there was nirvana.
The nirvana of hyperspace.
The nirvana of nothing.
But there was the quantum.
The quantum principle says
that even nothing is unstable.
There's even uncertainty
with respect to nothing.
Therefore, nothing became
unstable, and bubbles, bubbles
began to form.
Bubbling, as you may
know, is a purely
quantum mechanical effect.
If you have Newtonian billiard
balls representing atoms,
you will never get boiling.
Boiling is a purely
quantum mechanical effect.
Bubbles, in nothing,
began to form.
And these bubbles began
to expand rapidly,
giving us the Big Bang theory.
In other words, even
as we speak now,
universes may be being created
in an ocean of nothing.
The gospel according to Saint
John, chapter 1, verse 1, says,
"In the beginning was the Word,
and the Word was with God,
and the Word was God."
Well, today, we physicists
have a candidate
to complete Saint John
the Divine's gospel.
"In the beginning was the Word.
And the Word was the quantum.
And the quantum principle
says that even hyperspace
is unstable.
Bubbles began to form.
Bubbles began to expand
rapidly, and they, in turn,
became entire universes."
And then the question
is, is it possible to go
between universes?
Well, we physicists
have introduced
a concept called wormholes.
What is a wormhole?
Well, when you were
in elementary school,
your teacher told you that
if you take a sheet of paper,
and you put two
points on it, what
is the shortest distance
between two points?
Well, a straight line, right?
I mean, you didn't pass
elementary school unless you
said, teacher, a straight
line is the shortest distance
between two points.
Wrong.
The shortest distance between
two points is a wormhole.
A bridge through the third
dimension of hyperspace.
Now this concept of
a wormhole was first
introduced in England 150 years
ago to a general audience.
There was a professor of
mathematics, an Oxford don,
who knew about these things.
Mathematicians call them
multiply connected spaces.
That's the technical
term for it.
We physicists call
them wormholes.
But he knew that adults
would not respond to it.
So the first public
mention ever of a wormhole
came out in a children's book.
Who can tell me what is the
name of this children's book,
and who was this
Oxford mathematician?
It was "Alice in Wonderland,"
and the mathematician
was Charles Dodgson.
He knew that people would not
accept the musing of an Oxford
mathematician, so he wrote under
the pseudonym Lewis Carroll.
The looking glass
is the wormhole.
And today, in fact, it
was announced last week,
the Hubble Space
Telescope has now
photographed not only
39 black holes in space,
spinning black holes.
Black holes rotating about
a million miles an hour.
We no longer believe that black
holes collapse to a point.
That's the old picture.
Anyone falling through the
black hole would be crushed.
Einstein himself
realized that there's
another side to a black hole.
There's something called
the Einstein-Rosen Bridge.
The Einstein-Rosen
Bridge is the wormhole,
a tunnel through a black
hole to a parallel universe.
But when Einstein died,
physicists were not worried.
Anyone falling into a black
hole will be crushed into a dot.
No problem.
No way to go through the
Einstein-Rosen Bridge.
Well, then in 1963,
mathematician Roy Kerr,
writing in New Zealand,
found a new solution
of Einstein's
equation which show
that spinning black
holes collapse
to a ring, a ring of
neutrons, a ring of fire.
Centrifugal force
prevents gravity
from collapsing the ring.
And if you fell
through the ring,
you wind up on the
other side of forever.
The ring is a wormhole.
It is a tunnel, a gateway
through space and time.
We physicists are now working on
wormholes very rigorously now.
We no longer believe that
space is simply connected.
There could be multiply
connected spaces
similar to what you
find in "Twilight Zone."
And these universes may
give us the looking glass.
The rim of the
mirror-- not the mirror
itself-- the ring of the
mirror is the black hole.
Anyone putting their
hand through the ring
may find themselves on the
other side of the universe.
Well, if you can go, perhaps,
through this ring of fire
to the other side of forever,
through hyperspace, by bending
and folding space
itself, then perhaps you
can fold time as well.
Believe it or not,
we physicists believe
that time machines
are a legitimate form
of research activity.
The first time machine was
discovered in the 1930s,
mathematically, by a physicist
looking at Einstein's equation.
Godel, the famous
logician, in 1949,
found another solution
of Einstein's equation
which allowed for time travel.
If the universe
spins rather than
expands, if the
universe spins, and you
walk around the universe,
you will meet yourself
before you left.
How can that be?
How can you meet yourself
before you're born?
And what happens if you
take a gun along and shoot
your parents before you're born?
Or if you're
Michael J. Fox, what
happens if you went
backwards in time
and met your mother
as a teenager,
and she fell in love with you?
Talk about an Oedipus complex.
How can you be born if
your mother as a teenager
just fell in love with you?
Well, some of you may
be saying to yourself,
eh, I've heard it all before.
Science fiction,
yeah, yeah, yeah.
I know how to tease
apart those paradoxes.
Well, if you think you're so
good, take apart this one.
Robert Heinlein
talks about this.
A story that begins in 1945.
In 1945, there is a
dark and stormy night.
And a stranger comes
out of the darkness,
carrying a precious baby girl.
And he drops the baby
girl at an orphanage,
and then disappears
into the darkness,
never to be seen again.
Well, nuns find the baby girl.
They call her Jane.
What else to call her?
And Jane grows up wondering,
who is my mother, my father,
my brother, my sister,
my aunt, and my uncle?
Where did I come from?
I was left as a foundling
on the doorstep.
Well, when Jane is 17 years
old, a handsome drifter
suddenly sweeps into her
life, sweeps her off her feet.
And it's love at first sight.
But it was not meant to be.
They argue, and the drifter
stomps off into the darkness,
never to be seen again.
Poor Jane.
She's left abandoned
and pregnant.
They rush Jane to the hospital.
Something is wrong.
Yes, something's wrong.
She delivers a beautiful baby
girl that very same night.
But then somebody
breaks open the window,
steals into the hospital,
and steals Jane's baby girl.
Jane is bleeding, meanwhile.
It was a very
difficult delivery.
And the doctors find out that
Jane is actually not normal.
She is hermaphroditic.
Now I'm not going to define that
because this is a family show.
You can look that up in
the dictionary tonight.
Jane is not normal.
The doctors have to
change Jane into Jim.
It's a horrible operation.
Jane wakes up as a man.
And she says to himself,
I've really been screwed.
No parents, my
boyfriend disappears,
somebody steals my baby
girl, and now I'm Jim.
Well, Jim gets into fistfights
any time someone says,
where'd you come from?
Who's your mother, your father,
your brother, your sister,
your aunt, and your uncle?
One day, poor Jim is stone drunk
lying on the floor of a bar
after another fist fight.
And then a bartender
comes up to Jim and says,
Jim, I can help you.
You see, I'm really
a time traveler.
Come into my time
machine, and we will
unravel the mystery of Jane.
Well, they go into
the time machine.
He spins the dial.
And they go way
back into the past.
And then poor Jim is just
left someplace in the past.
He's very confused.
And then he meets,
all of a sudden,
a beautiful 17-year-old girl.
And it's love at first sight.
But you know, it
was not meant to be.
They quarrel, and Jim stomps
off into the darkness.
But then Jim says, oh, wait a
minute, this happened to me.
I'm not going to
repeat history again.
I want to make sure
that my baby girl gets
the best education possible.
So Jim comes back
to the hospital,
breaks open the window,
steals into the hospital,
and steals his baby girl.
And together, they go back
in time again, back, way back
into the past, until it is 1945.
It is a dark and stormy night.
Jim comes in from the darkness,
carrying his precious baby girl
that he leaves off
at an orphanage,
knowing that she'll get the
best of care from the nuns.
And the baby girl
grows up wondering,
who is my mother, my father,
my brother, my sister, my aunt,
and my uncle?
Well, meanwhile,
Jim says to himself,
you know, this is pretty
neat, traveling in time.
I'm going to take the
advice of the bartender.
I'm going to join the Time
Travelers Corp. And he does.
Jim joins the Time
Travelers Corp
and has many famous exploits
in the annals of time.
And when Jim is an old, elderly
man, he's about to retire,
and Jim says, I want one
last wish, one last wish.
My last mission shall be
to go backwards in time
to impersonate a bartender, to
meet a certain bar room drunk
who's lying on the floor
right now wondering,
who is my mother, my father,
my brother, my sister, my aunt,
and my uncle?
Now for 10 points, who is
Jane's mother, father, brother,
sister, aunt, uncle,
grandfather, granddaughter,
great grandfather, great
great granddaughter?
Jane.
Can you imagine
a family reunion?
And they get into a food fight.
You did this to me.
No, you did that to yourself.
What are you talking about?
Can you tease apart
the mystery of Jane?
Well, the answer is
given in my book.
Yes, we physicists believe that
time travel may be possible.
You see that in the video
in just a few minutes.
However, there's a catch.
There's always a catch.
String theory, time machines,
these bubbles of universes,
they only take place
at a fantastic energy,
the Planck energy-- 10 to the
19th billion electron volts,
the energy of a universe,
the energy of a black hole.
Time machines are not for us.
But then you may ask
yourself a question, well,
who can be a master of time?
Who can bend time
into a pretzel?
Who can punch a hole in space?
Who has the power to leap
into the 10th dimension?
Well, maybe our descendants.
Maybe one of these days,
someone will knock on your door
and say, Grandad,
100 times removed.
Or maybe aliens
from outer space.
We physicists, when we
look into the night sky,
we don't talk about little green
men in the "National Enquirer."
We seriously talk about energy,
alien energy in outer space.
We talk about Type I, Type II,
and Type III civilizations.
A Type I civilization has
the power of a planet.
They control the weather.
They control the power of
volcanoes, earthquakes.
They mine the ocean.
Cities on the ocean.
A Type I civilization, a
planetary civilization.
Eventually, such a civilization
exhausts the power of a planet,
and they go to the stars.
A Type II civilization is
a stellar civilization.
They play with stars.
When junior wants to
borrow the starship,
dad says, sure, you
can have the starship.
Just put a white dwarf
star in the gas tank.
And off he goes.
A Type II civilization,
they play with solar flares.
A Type III civilization
is galactic.
They have colonized huge
chunks of the galaxy.
And they are truly galactic.
Now I'm one of the advisers
to the Star Trek series.
I've been on
startrek.com many times,
answering questions
of the Trekkies.
In fact, once they had William
Shatner on startrek.com,
answering all the
questions of the Trekkies.
And of course, everyone hit
him with questions like,
what are black holes?
What about the fourth dimension?
What about time travel?
And poor Shatner was
getting very irritated.
And he said, dammit,
dammit, I'm an actor.
I'm an actor.
I don't know anything
about black holes.
Ask me a question
about priceline.com.
Well, I was on startrek.com,
answering all the questions.
One question was, what
is the Federation?
The Federation is an emerging
Type II civilization.
They can barely,
barely ignite stars.
In one episode,
they ignite a star.
They're an emerging
Type II civilization.
But they fear a true
Type III civilization.
A rapacious civilization
that's Type III
eats Type II civilizations
for breakfast.
Who can tell me the name of
the only genuine Type III
civilization on
network television?
The Borg.
And if you did not
understand what
just transpired in the last five
minutes, get with the program.
It's on Channel 11, WB.
Well, I was in London a few
years ago on a book tour.
And I spoke at the
London Planetarium.
And a little boy comes up to me.
And he says, Professor,
you're wrong, there's Type IV.
Type IV.
And I said to this
little kid, shut up, kid.
What do you know?
You know nothing.
I'm the big professor.
What about this Type IV?
And then he said,
professor, you're wrong,
there is Type IV, the power
of-- well, you tell me.
What is Type IV, anybody?
The Q is Type IV.
Look that one up.
The power of the continuum.
The power of a god.
There could be Type IV.
Last week, front page of The New
York Times, it was announced,
physicists are now closing
in on the microsecond
of the first
instant of creation.
And we now believe that
the universe, indeed,
came out of nothing.
A quantum fluctuation
in nothing.
And what's driving
the universe is
something called dark energy.
Dark energy is driving the
expansion of the universe.
And last week, front
page news in The New York
Times as we physicists are
now closing in on dark energy.
Yes, there are
planets, stars, galaxy.
But there's also the energy
on nothing the energy
of the continuum perhaps
a type for civilization.
Nikola Tesla talked about vacuum
energy, zero-point energy,
the energy of nothing.
People laughed at Tesla.
Now we think that the universe
is driven by dark energy.
And last week's announcement
in The New York Times
gives us pause because
the universe is queerer
than we can suppose.
Well, what do we know?
What about our civilization?
Are we Type I that
control the weather?
Are we Type II that
play with solar flares?
But we tied three they
cruise across the galaxy what
early on this cosmic
scale anybody?
We are Type 0.
We get our energy
from dead plants.
And George W. Bush wants
even more dead plants
to be burned-- oil and coal.
Personally, I do not
believe that we should go
to reactors or nuclear energy.
I think that's an
unfinished technology, too
dangerous for an emerging
Type 0 civilization.
Plutonium.
Plutonium is named
after the god of hell,
and perhaps with a reason,
is named after Pluto.
And in fact, some
physicists have
tried to say that
plutonium is not so
bad, that we can use plutonium.
Well, one physicists said
plutonium is no worse
than reprocessed nuclear waste.
And he challenged Ralph
Nader to an eating contest,
that he would eat
as much plutonium
as Ralph Nader would eat of
concentrated DDT and nicotine.
An eating contest.
I call this the Gourmet School
of Nuclear Waste Disposal.
Feed it to those physicists
who think that plutonium is not
so dangerous and are willing to
eat it on national television,
OK?
The question is, what are we?
We are Type 0.
We are children when it
comes to the universe.
The universe is indeed
queerer than we can suppose.
We are Type 0.
In fact, we are at the
most dangerous transition.
Once you are Type I,
you are planetary.
All the old sectarian,
nationalist, fundamental
passions that rule the
swamp, they're gone.
Once you're Type II,
you are invulnerable.
You are immortal.
Nothing known to science can
destroy a Type II civilization.
Meteor impacts,
comets, supernovas,
nothing known to science can
destroy a Type II civilization.
But you see, we are Type 0.
We are in the most dangerous
point of our transition,
but we see the beginnings
of a Type I everywhere.
What is the internet?
The internet is an emerging
Type I telephone system.
That's all it is.
What is the European Union?
What is NAFTA?
The beginning of
a Type I economy.
What's going to be the language?
Who can tell me, what's going to
be the language of this Type I
civilization?
It's already clear now.
English will be the language
of this emerging Type I
civilization.
What's going to be the culture
of this Type I civilization?
You can go to
anywhere in the world,
show people a picture
of one man and woman,
instantly recognizable anywhere
on the surface of the Earth.
Who are these two people,
a woman and a man,
instantly recognizable
on the planet Earth?
Madonna and Arnold
Schwarzenegger.
That's the beginning of our
Type I civilization culture.
My god.
Blue jeans, rock
and roll, rap music.
Ugh.
The emerging of
a Type I culture.
However, we may not make it.
My friends, other physicists,
say, where are they?
Where are they?
We don't see them.
I mean, there should
be 10,000 of them,
according to Frank
Drake, in our galaxy.
We don't see any of them.
Perhaps one of the
reasons is we're
in the most dangerous
point of our transition--
transition between
Type 0 to Type I.
The generation
now alive today is
the most important
generation ever to walk
the surface of the Earth.
We will make the transition
to Type I in about 100 years.
Going at 3% per year, we
will attain planetary power
in about 100 years.
And we may not make it
because of nuclear weapons,
greenhouse effect,
perhaps emerging diseases.
There are huge barriers
facing our emergence
as a Type I civilization.
Let me also say,
by the way, when
we look for outer space
signals, our Earth
also radiates into outer space.
For 50 years, we've
been broadcasting
radio and television.
Surrounding the Earth,
there is a sphere, expanding
at the speed of light,
50 light years in radius,
containing the finest of
our cultural archives,
the noblest achievements of
the human creative spirit,
like "I Love Lucy,"
"Leave it to Beaver,"
"Beavis and Butt-head."
First of all, let me say
that we scientists have
tried to put ourselves in
the position of a Type III
civilization.
If we are truly galactic, and
we can use perhaps wormholes
or whatever to explore the
galaxy, how would we do so?
There are simply too many stars,
200 billion stars out there.
What we would do is send
robots, self-replicating robots.
We're not going to
send William Shatner.
These robots will land on a
moon, because moons are stable.
They have no erosion.
They're stable for
billions of years.
And once on the moon,
they'll build a factory.
The factory will then
produce thousands
of copies of themselves,
which will then
shoot out to other moons
in other star systems.
And they will build
factories on them.
In other words, this
is the way that a virus
colonizes your entire body.
Think about it.
You consist of about
100 trillion cells.
And yet, one cold
virus, one cold virus
can colonize 100 trillion
cells in a fairly short period
of time, like about a week.
This is how viruses do it.
First encounter will
most likely take place
through what are called
self-replicating von Neumann
probes, and on our moon,
if there is a Type III
civilization in our own galaxy.
If there is Type III in
our galaxy, and Carl Sagan
firmly believed that there was.
If there's a Type III
civilization in our galaxy,
where would they most likely be?
They may have passed through
our system millions of years ago
and seen a planet in
the Goldilocks zone--
not too close, not too
far from the mother sun.
Left a probe on our moon.
Now let me ask you a question.
How long before
we become Type I?
Before we have an
operating moon base?
Before we can then probe
to see whether or not
any passing Type III
civilization left
a probe on our own moon?
Answer.
100 years.
Think about this.
On our own moon,
there could very well
be evidence of
previous visitation.
This is the most mathematically,
scientifically justifiable
theory that we have
for first encounter.
In other words, they
may already be here.
Except they're just waiting.
A Type 0 civilization
is not that interesting.
As I said before, Frank
Drake, the famous astronomer,
estimated there should be 10,000
planets in our galaxy harboring
life.
But you see, they're
probably Type 0.
And they may have
self-destructed
before they reached Type I.
Once you attain Type I status,
you are interesting
to a passing Type III.
And then we have
another question.
How would they interact with us?
And how would we
interact with them?
If you see ants in
a forest, and you're
building a 10-lane
superhighway near this anthill,
would the ants even know that
there's a 10-lane superhighway
going by?
Would they even understand
what a 10-lane superhighway is?
Would they be able
to communicate,
sense the presence of a 10-lane
superhighway being built
right next to the backyard?
Well, that 10-lane
superhighway is
comparable to a technology
of a Type III civilization
compared to the Type
0 that we have today.
We wouldn't even
know where to look.
We look at just one frequency,
the frequency near hydrogen.
In fact, the most
sophisticated way
of sending messages through the
galaxy is not on one frequency,
but you have what are called
spread spectrum broadcast.
You take a frequency, spread
it across all frequencies.
And then send that
signal throughout space.
That way, a passing star,
a passing meteorite,
won't disturb all frequencies.
Maybe one frequency
would have static.
But you spread these
frequencies over all of them
and then reassemble
them at the other end.
Now if you were to listen
in on a spread frequency
message with your
radio telescopes,
what would you hear?
Nonsense.
Pure nonsense.
In the same way that
ants would listen
in on the conversations
of people building
a 10-lane superhighway.
So what I'm saying is
perhaps they're already here.
We're just too
primitive to know it.
String theory itself is
too difficult to solve.
No human mind at the present
time can solve the theory.
However, people have
emailed me about the fact
that string theory
has magic numbers,
and that these magic numbers are
written in ancient manuscripts.
Now I'm no authority
on ancient manuscripts,
I'm just an authority
in mathematical physics.
But string theory singles out
two magic numbers-- 26 and 10.
These are the magic
numbers of string theory.
In fact, the first
magic number, 26,
was pioneered by
an Indian mystic,
one of the greatest
mathematicians
of the century, Ramanujan.
He lived in total
obscurity in India.
He lived in total obscurity.
He wrote letters to the
great minds of England,
trying to get anyone
to sponsor him.
And meanwhile, he
was racing ahead,
creating mathematics
we've never seen
before in the 26th dimension.
Ramanujan's life
is so fantastic,
a movie was made recently.
I think most of you
have seen that movie.
Who can tell me the
name of a Hollywood
movie based on
perhaps the greatest
Hindu mystic of the century?
Ramanujan.
The movie is called "Goodwill
Hunting," with Matt Damon.
Who is Matt Damon?
Matt Damon is Ramanujan.
In fact, in the
movie, if you listen
to the conversation
between the MIT professors,
they even say it-- "My god,
he's the next Ramanujan."
Well, what was Ramanujan doing?
His manuscripts have still not
been totally deciphered yet.
He was working in
the 26th dimension,
the other magic number
of string theory.
However, there's a super magic
number, and that number is 10.
Well, somebody emailed
me a few years ago,
stating that in Kabbalist
theory, if you add up
the letters of God,
Yahweh, they add to 26.
And in the Kabbalah, there are
the 10 dimensions of heaven.
And again, I'm no
authority on religions.
All I'm saying is that
string theory does isolate
two magic numbers-- 26 and 10.
So once again,
thank you so much.
You've been a great audience.
>>Thank you. [INAUDIBLE].
>>And I'll stay for
questions afterwards.